Algorithmic bias encodes prejudice into machines, a phenomenon known as the New Jim Code.
But how does math actually learn to be racist?
People assume technology is objective, but designers quietly bake human blind spots into
the architecture.
Take the commercial facial analysis software developed by major companies like IBM and
Microsoft.
To learn what a human face looks like, an AI ingests a massive library of reference photos,
called a benchmark data set.
The system has no independent concept of a human face.
It can only recognize the specific mathematical patterns present in the photos it was fed.
And researchers uncovered a critical flaw.
These standard data sets were overwhelmingly composed of lighter-skinned subjects.
In fact, up to 86% of the reference images featured lighter-skinned people.
Because of this skewed data, the trained AI effortlessly and accurately identifies lighter-skinned
males, but it struggles to find a mathematical match for darker-skinned females, resulting
in error rates of nearly 35%.
Sociologist Ruha Benjamin calls this the New Jim Code, when discriminatory design hides
behind a cloak of algorithmic objectivity.
So when a commercial facial recognition system misidentifies a person in the real world,
and flags them as a risk, it isn't an accidental glitch, it's engineered in equity.